Updated constraints doc to include the new recommended syntax (#6105)
dbt-labs/docs.getdbt.com: website/docs/reference/resource-properties/constraints.md

**Constraints are never applied on `ephemeral` models or those materialized as `view`**. Only `table` and `incremental` models support applying and enforcing constraints.

<VersionBlock lastVersion="1.8">

> ## Defining constraints

Reviewer: the 'defining constraints' section is generally the same for 1.8 and 1.9 - would it make sense to instead version wrap the code snippet and 'When using foreign_key, you need to specify the referenced table's schema manually...' content for 1.8 and lower? Rather than version wrapping defining constraints twice (for 1.8 and lower and 1.9+)?

If you are defining multiple `primary_key` constraints for a single model, those _must_ be defined at the model level. Defining multiple `primary_key` constraints at the column level is not supported. 

The structure of a constraint is:
- `type` (required): one of `not_null`, `unique`, `primary_key`, `foreign_key`, `check`, `custom`
- `expression`: Free text input to qualify the constraint. Required for certain constraint types, and optional for others.
- `name` (optional): Human-friendly name for this constraint. Supported by some data platforms.
- `columns` (model-level only): List of column names to apply the constraint over

In [dbt Cloud Versionless](/docs/dbt-versions/upgrade-dbt-version-in-cloud#versionless), you can use the improved syntax to define foreign keys, which uses `ref`. This feature will be available in the upcoming 1.9 release. The recommended syntax means:

dbt automatically resolves references to other models, ensuring they:

- Capture dependencies
- Work across different environments

Here are some examples showing how the new syntax is used:

<File name='models/schema.yml'>

```yml

models:

> 

Author: ```suggestion
models:
  - name: <model_name>
    
    # required
    config:
      contract:
        enforced: true
    
    # model-level constraints
    constraints:
      - type: primary_key
        columns: [FIRST_COLUMN, SECOND_COLUMN, ...]
      - type: FOREIGN_KEY # multi_column
        columns: [FIRST_COLUMN, SECOND_COLUMN, ...]
        expression: "OTHER_MODEL_SCHEMA.OTHER_MODEL_NAME (OTHER_MODEL_FIRST_COLUMN, OTHER_MODEL_SECOND_COLUMN, ...)"
      - type: check
        columns: [FIRST_COLUMN, SECOND_COLUMN, ...]
        expression: "FIRST_COLUMN != SECOND_COLUMN"
        name: HUMAN_FRIENDLY_NAME
      - type: ...
    
    columns:
      - name: FIRST_COLUMN
        data_type: DATA_TYPE
        
        # column-level constraints
        constraints:
          - type: not_null
          - type: unique
          - type: foreign_key
            expression: OTHER_MODEL_SCHEMA.OTHER_MODEL_NAME (OTHER_MODEL_COLUMN)
          - type: ...
```

If you are defining multiple `primary_key` constraints for a single model, those _must_ be defined at the model level. Defining multiple `primary_key` constraints at the column level is not supported. 

The structure of a constraint is:
- `type` (required): one of `not_null`, `unique`, `primary_key`, `foreign_key`, `check`, `custom`
- `expression`: Free text input to qualify the constraint. Required for certain constraint types, and optional for others.
- `name` (optional): Human-friendly name for this constraint. Supported by some data platforms.
- `columns` (model-level only): List of column names to apply the constraint over

In [dbt Cloud Versionless](/docs/dbt-versions/upgrade-dbt-version-in-cloud#versionless), you can use the improved syntax to define foreign keys, which uses `ref`. This feature will be available in the upcoming 1.9 release. The recommended syntax means:

dbt automatically resolves references to other models, ensuring they:

- Capture dependencies
- Work across different environments

Here are some examples showing how the new syntax is used:

<File name='models/schema.yml'>

```yml

models:

>       - name: id

Author: ```suggestion

```

          - type: ...
```

In [dbt Cloud Versionless](/docs/dbt-versions/upgrade-dbt-version-in-cloud#versionless), you can use the improved syntax to define foreign keys, which uses `ref`. This feature will be available in the upcoming 1.9 release. For more information, update the documentation version to 1.9 and refer to the [following section](/reference/resource-properties/constraints#whats-better-about-this-syntax).

</File>

</VersionBlock>

> <VersionBlock firstVersion="1.9">

Reviewer: just reiterating the [same comment here](https://github.com/dbt-labs/docs.getdbt.com/pull/6105/files#r1768476630) - i don't think we should version block this 'defining constraints' section since the content is the exact same for v1.9+ and v1.8 and lower. so to avoid manually updating both contents, i recommend using version blocks on the actual content / code snippets:

![Screenshot 2024-09-24 at 12 27 15](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/9fcac431-fa34-463e-a42b-3c11860d826c)

If you are defining multiple `primary_key` constraints for a single model, those _must_ be defined at the model level. Defining multiple `primary_key` constraints at the column level is not supported. 

The structure of a constraint is:
- `type` (required): one of `not_null`, `unique`, `primary_key`, `foreign_key`, `check`, `custom`
- `expression`: Free text input to qualify the constraint. Required for certain constraint types, and optional for others.
- `name` (optional): Human-friendly name for this constraint. Supported by some data platforms.
- `columns` (model-level only): List of column names to apply the constraint over

In [dbt Cloud Versionless](/docs/dbt-versions/upgrade-dbt-version-in-cloud#versionless), you can use the improved syntax to define foreign keys, which uses `ref`. This feature will be available in the upcoming 1.9 release. 

The recommended syntax means dbt automatically resolves references to other models, ensuring they:

- Capture dependencies
- Work across different environments

> Here's an example showing how the new syntax is used:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here's an example showing how to use the recommended syntax:
```

<File name='models/schema.yml'>

```yml

> models:

Reviewer: can you double check this yaml format? it looks like some of the indentation is incorrect (`name: <my_model>` and `columns`, for example)

If you are defining multiple `primary_key` constraints for a single model, those _must_ be defined at the model level. Defining multiple `primary_key` constraints at the column level is not supported. 

The structure of a constraint is:
- `type` (required): one of `not_null`, `unique`, `primary_key`, `foreign_key`, `check`, `custom`
- `expression`: Free text input to qualify the constraint. Required for certain constraint types, and optional for others.
- `name` (optional): Human-friendly name for this constraint. Supported by some data platforms.
- `columns` (model-level only): List of column names to apply the constraint over

In [dbt Cloud Versionless](/docs/dbt-versions/upgrade-dbt-version-in-cloud#versionless), you can use the improved syntax to define foreign keys, which uses `ref`. This feature will be available in the upcoming 1.9 release. The recommended syntax means:

dbt automatically resolves references to other models, ensuring they:

- Capture dependencies
- Work across different environments

Here are some examples showing how the new syntax is used:

<File name='models/schema.yml'>

```yml

models:

>   - name: my_model

Author: ```suggestion

```

>     constraints:

Author: ```suggestion
```

>       - type: foreign_key

Author: ```suggestion

```

>         columns: [id]

Author: ```suggestion

```

>         to: ref('my_model_to') | source('source', 'source_table')

Author: ```suggestion

```

>         to_columns: [id]

Author: ```suggestion

```

>     columns:

Author: ```suggestion

```

>       - name: id

Author: ```suggestion

```

>         data_type: integer

Author: ```suggestion

```

> 

Author: ```suggestion

```

> ```

Author: ```suggestion

```

> 

Author: ```suggestion

```

> </File>

Author: ```suggestion

```

> <File name='models/schema.yml'>

Author: ```suggestion

```

> 

Author: ```suggestion

```

> ```yml

Author: ```suggestion

```

> models:

Author: ```suggestion

```

>   - name: my_model

Author: ```suggestion

```

>     columns:

Author: ```suggestion

```

      - name: id

>         data_type: integer

Author: ```suggestion

```

>         constraints:

Author: ```suggestion

```

>         - type: foreign_key

Author: ```suggestion

```

>           to: ref('my_model_to') | source('source', 'source_table')

Author: ```suggestion

```

>           to_columns: [id]

Author: ```suggestion

```

          - type: ...
```

> Today, in [dbt Cloud Versionless](/docs/dbt-versions/upgrade-dbt-version-in-cloud#versionless), you can use the new recommended syntax for defining foreign keys. This syntax leverages `ref`. For more information, refer to the section for the [forthcoming v1.9 release](/reference/resource-properties/constraints#whats-better-about-this-syntax).

Reviewer: would the user need to update the docs version to 1.9 to view the 'whats better about this syntax' section? also, i recommend to set a reminder to remove the 'This feature will be available in the upcoming 1.9 release. ' after 1.9 is actually released.

```suggestion
In [dbt Cloud Versionless](/docs/dbt-versions/upgrade-dbt-version-in-cloud#versionless), you can use the improved syntax to define foreign keys, which uses `ref`. This feature will be available in the upcoming 1.9 release. For more information, update the documentation version to 1.9 and refer to the [following section](/reference/resource-properties/constraints#whats-better-about-this-syntax).
```

Author: Good idea about setting the reminder @mirnawong1 
@jtcohen6 - do you have a date as to when 1.9 will be available?

</File>

</VersionBlock>

<VersionBlock firstVersion="1.9">

## Defining constraints

Constraints may be defined for a single column, or at the model level for one or more columns. As a general rule, we recommend defining single-column constraints directly on those columns.

If you are defining multiple `primary_key` constraints for a single model, those _must_ be defined at the model level. Defining multiple `primary_key` constraints at the column level is not supported. 

The structure of a constraint is:
- `type` (required): one of `not_null`, `unique`, `primary_key`, `foreign_key`, `check`, `custom`
- `expression`: Free text input to qualify the constraint. Required for certain constraint types, and optional for others.
- `name` (optional): Human-friendly name for this constraint. Supported by some data platforms.
- `columns` (model-level only): List of column names to apply the constraint over

> Today, in [dbt Cloud Versionless](/docs/dbt-versions/upgrade-dbt-version-in-cloud#versionless), you can use the new recommended syntax for defining foreign keys. This syntax leverages `ref`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In [dbt Cloud Versionless](/docs/dbt-versions/upgrade-dbt-version-in-cloud#versionless), you can use the improved syntax to define foreign keys, which uses `ref`. This feature will be available in the upcoming 1.9 release. The recommended syntax means:
```

> ### What's better about this syntax?

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

> dbt will automatically resolve references to other models so that these references:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
dbt automatically resolves references to other models, ensuring they:
```

> - It captures dependencies.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Capture dependencies
```

> - Works across environments.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Work across different environments
```

> Here are two examples demonstrating how the new syntax is utilized:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here are some examples showing how the new syntax is used:
```

> <File name='models/schema.yml'>

Reviewer: suggest being consistent with the code snippets. in 1.8 and lower, it's all one <File name> with the `model` and `column` indication, as opposed to two code snippets:

```yml

> models:

Reviewer: great code snippets!

  - name: my_model
    constraints:
      - type: foreign_key
        columns: [id]
        to: ref('my_model_to') | source('source', 'source_table')
        to_columns: [id]
    columns:
      - name: id
        data_type: integer

```

</File>

<File name='models/schema.yml'>

```yml

models:
  - name: my_model
    columns:
      - name: id
        data_type: integer
        constraints:
        - type: foreign_key
          to: ref('my_model_to') | source('source', 'source_table')
          to_columns: [id]

```

</File>

:::info

> The recommended syntax for defining foreign keys will be included in dbt Core v1.9 (open source) when it is released.

Reviewer: do we think this callout is useful for the user here? wondering if mentioning the 1.9 release in the ["In dbt Cloud Versionless, you can now use.."](https://github.com/dbt-labs/docs.getdbt.com/pull/6105/files#r1768466295) sentence?

Author: Hiya @mirnawong1 

Thanks for this suggestion. I'm happy to remove it and mentioning it in the doc you've linked but @jtcohen6 said this in slack: https://dbt-labs.slack.com/archives/C044WU55X7Y/p1726593674040019?thread_ts=1726589431.360079&cid=C044WU55X7Y. I'll wait his update and remove on his ok?

Kind Regards
Natalie

Reviewer 2: Agree with @mirnawong1 - "In dbt Cloud Versionless, you can now use ... This will become available in dbt Core v1.9."

</File>

> In [dbt Cloud Versionless](/docs/dbt-versions/upgrade-dbt-version-in-cloud#versionless), you can use the improved syntax to define foreign keys, which uses `ref`. This feature will be available in the upcoming 1.9 release. For more information, update the documentation version to 1.9 and refer to the [What's better about this syntax section](/reference/resource-properties/constraints?version=1.9.1#whats-better-about-this-syntax).

Reviewer: linking to the versioned section wasn't working so maybe its easier to unlink and just mention?
```suggestion
In [dbt Cloud Versionless](/docs/dbt-versions/upgrade-dbt-version-in-cloud#versionless), you can use the improved syntax to define foreign keys, which uses `ref`. This feature will be available in the upcoming 1.9 release. For more information, update the documentation version to 1.9 and refer to the 'What's better about this syntax' section.
```

          - type: foreign_key
            expression: OTHER_MODEL_SCHEMA.OTHER_MODEL_NAME (OTHER_MODEL_COLUMN)
          - type: ...

```

</File>

> The recommended syntax for defining foreign keys will be included in dbt Core v1.9 (open source) when it is released.

Author: ```suggestion
In dbt Cloud Versionless, you can now use the recommended syntax for defining foreign keys. This will become available in dbt Core v1.9.
```

> :::

Author: ```suggestion

```

          - type: foreign_key
            expression: OTHER_MODEL_SCHEMA.OTHER_MODEL_NAME (OTHER_MODEL_COLUMN)
          - type: ...

```

</File>

> :::info

Author: ```suggestion

```
